<!DOCTYPE HTML>
<head>
<meta name="description" content="Basic Portfolio">
<meta name="author" content="name goes here">
<meta charset="UTF-8">

<title>formal | my portfolio</title>
<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
</head>
<body>
	<content>
		<header>
		<h1>my portfolio</h1>
		<ul id="nav">
			<li><a href="index.html">home</a></li>
			<li><a href="lived.html">lived <br />experiences</a></li>
			<li><a href="#">cultural <br />analysis</a></li>
			<li><a href="formal.html">formal <br />research</a></li>
			<li><a href="#">remix</a></li>
			<li><a href="#">course <br />retrospective</a></li>
			<li><a href="#">blog</a></li>
		</ul>
		</header>
		<main>
			<h1>about me</h1>
			<p>University of Michigan











Marketing and Advertising
Formal Research Paper







Ian Schlitt
A46113947
WRA 110 
C. Daniels
7 November, 2013



	As soon as you wake up from the time you go to bed you are constantly being bombarded with advertisements and branding. Whether it’s the commercial on the radio that plays from your alarm clock or the decals on your favorite NASCAR, advertising is everywhere. All of this though branches down to the marketing teams that designed and executed the marketing plan for each company.  These individuals or teams collaborate with the companies to come up with a good marketing idea to increase sales and revenue. This job involves combining business skills, creative thinking as well as a good understanding of psychological behaviors. Every successful company or event uses marketing to promote their good or service. With a good education you can make a good sum of money working for companies that need this service. The noun marketing means the technique of promoting, selling and distributing a product or service. This means you can promote just about anything to anyone, even including yourself.
	There are two main sub categories of marketing, research and advertising. These two duties are what most people go into when they choose marketing as there career path or goal. With research you are the number crunchers and brains behind the projects. You are the ones conducting surveys and collecting research to lay out demographics of all sorts. Demographics are what the other people look at like the advertisers to assist them in creatively coming up with a new idea. Demographics are the study of large groups of people and the trend’s that are associated with them. So researchers go out and collect sufficient data to come back and organize in a way so that it’s easily understood what certain people want, do, like or any behavioral trait they have. This makes it more efficient for the companies to see that their advertisements aren’t being wasted.  You wouldn’t want to spend a lot of money advertising expensive cars like Lamborghini’s in a city that is very poor because there isn’t enough money to purchase those luxury items. 
	The second, other duty that represents marketing is advertising. Advertising is what we see all around us at all times. You may be able to escape oxygen easier than advertising. The logo on my computer, the ad on the side of the website I am using right now, the ad playing in my headphones between songs on my Pandora station and the swoosh on my shoes are all advertising. This is what this job does. They are the people who think of the best way to get you to buy more of whatever the company has to offer. Advertising firms create relationships with the companies by bringing them new ad campaigns that are creative and clever. You can see this portrayed during the super bowl.  People who don’t even like the game watch just for the commercials and get the most attention during the following days.  Advertising can even go into promoting certain events which is another popular thing for students going down the marketing career path. 
	Marketing and its advertising side comes down to four simple words, the four P’s of marketing, price, product place and promotion. These are what every marketing student needs to learn before they move on with anything else. This is what you start with every time you need a new idea. Price is what you consider once you figure out how much something is worth to consumers. This comes along with other factors like bundling and discounts. You also must consider the startup costs to make sure you aren’t losing money. Place is the logistics behind how and what you will be channeling the good or service to the consumer.  This is how you distribute the good or service in the most efficient way. Product is what you are selling to the customer. Products can be goods or services; this is when you create an understanding of the functionality of it, the brand, and the packaging. This is where they decide what they want their good or service to represent to the costumer. And finally promotion this is how the costumer finds out about the product through advertising, sales forces, publicity and sales promotion.
	The Michigan State University Broad College of Business has a full time MBA average marketing salary for the class of 2012 at seventy nine thousand dollars a year. This is almost double what an article in the Huffington Post has listed for the average starting salary a year out of college. This is very enticing to Michigan State students who are interested in business majors. Acquiring a Full-time MBA in marketing research will definitely help you make that kind of money.  Another great thing about marketing is there are so many ways of going about working. You can start your own self promoted business that can be hired for different jobs, you can work for a firm that handles many companies or even work for a company that has its own marketing team. This allows many people to pick jobs that fit them such as if they like working in groups or individually. Some of the top companies that www.inc.com listed like DataXu, Emerge Digital Group and AdRoll all have revenues over twenty three million dollars, and have three-year growth percentages over fifteen thousand percent. This shows that there is a huge market out there for marketing graduates. This brings hope to students who are struggling to find what they want out of college.  Also location is not a problem; you can find a job just about anywhere you want as long as there is money to be spent. That’s what makes marketing such a lucrative business aspect. 
	Marketing research is broken down into four words of its own, the SWOT analysis. SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportunity and threats. These four words represent a product or service in its four main aspects. The SWOT analysis forces you to really take a look into what your product is. Strengths are the positive qualities you have and weaknesses are the negative, these are pretty self-explanatory.  Opportunities though is where it really opens your mind to something’s potential because now you can look to what opportunities are present for you to take advantage of. Researchers use this to gain new leads on markets in order to make the product what it really should be.  Now threats are what they look at to find out what to avoid. You don’t want to advertise BP oil in an area where people are fighting for harsher environmental laws, which would just be a waste of money. That area would pose as a threat to your company and you would either want to avoid it or fix it. This is an important aspect of marketing researcher’s daily jobs. 
	I read an article published in 1992 titled, The marketing of advertising: two trade groups tout its benefits for consumers, marketer, this article explains the need for advertising and how consumers are becoming to see advertising as a nuisance as well as a problem. The two trade groups that are touting consumers together to persuade their thoughts on advertising and marketing are the International Advertising Association (IAA) and the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA). These two groups are well respected groups in the advertising and marketing worlds. The OAAA today is responsible for regulating over ninety percent of the advertising revenues itself. These two both have their respected markets to oversee but worked together to help promote the new way of marketing and advertising. Gordon Hughes the president of the OAAA states, “shared experience of everyone sitting around the water cooler on Friday morning talking about what Claire and Heathcliff Huxtable did the night before is gone”, “This is not a slam dunk on TV. That’s just what happened”. This to me is a great article on how the marketing game has changed in the last twenty years. The Article continues listing plans for the upcoming marketing and advertising mediums which is almost spot on to what actually is used today, being that this was written over twenty years ago. The IAA came up with an ad campaign that is supposed to target everyone from, “Moammar Qaddafi to the Queen of England”. They even spelled out plans for targeting different countries with different looks on advertising. Countries like Russian and China were showed advertisements with tag lines, “Advertising—that’s the way it works”, whereas countries familiar with advertising were shown ads with taglines like, “Advertising, The Right to Choose”. This is what marketing is all about. Not only is this article about marketing, it shows how the marketing teams executed this world wide campaign to encourage marketing and advertising. “Were trying to help people understand the value of advertising in the healthy and emerging economies as well,” said Norman Vale the group’s director general of the IAA. This article was a great look into what the basis of marketing was no matter what date it was published. The OAAA executed a new plan to increase the image of marketing outside of a TV market and the IAA did a great job opening the world up to the endless possibilities of marketing and advertising. 
	The Economist magazine published a story on “The Ultimate Marketing Machine – Internet Advertising” in 2006. This story is all about the potential in advertising via the internet. This was published just after the boom of the internet seven years ago. Everyone had just gotten very familiar with the internet and the new search engines, new software and new websites. It started off explaining how one of the first advertisers came about. John Wanamaker in the 1870’s was from Philadelphia, a strong Christian and very wise business man. He invented the department store concept as well as price tags so all people under god received fair treatment. He was also a pioneer in the advertising game. He placed ads in the newspaper and, “He went about it in a Christian way, neither advertising on Sundays nor fibbing (thus minting the concept of "truth in advertising"). And, with his precise business mind, he expounded a witticism that has ever since seemed like an economic law: "Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted," he said. "The trouble is, I don't know which half.” Mr. Wanamaker is now a well-known man in the business world for this statement. He pretty much created the fundamental structure of Marketing in a scholarly sense. We now study and look deep into the money we invest in marketing and advertising because like I stated before you don’t want to waste money advertising winter jackets in the Sahara Desert. The article continues explaining how companies pay for ads in cost per thousands (CPM’s) and think they’re advertising well by dropping what they call an “Atom bomb” in the market. This term means that they pay large quantities of money to show a large audience the ad. Where now we know what segmentation is and “segmentation is at best "dropping conventional bombs on villages". The collateral damage is still considerable”. We break the market up to reduce the wasted money advertising in inappropriate mediums. This is where the Internet comes in. The story explains how Google an unprofitable company turned into one of the best advertising platforms in the world. They did this by merging with a company that looks into what each computer user clicks and then advertises based on what the user is interested in. This is why when you search for a new pair of NIKE shoes, you get thousands of ads on the side that show off NIKE products. An ingenious idea that all of the rest of the internet now does. Cost-per-click is the name now and is how that all works, companies now pay for every time they click the search or the ad. With new advancements in technology we can now look further into if the customer actually did get reached through the ad and is not just a waste of money like Mr. Wanamaker first pointed out. 
	Last week I met up with my family friend from home, Nicki, to interview her about how her new job with Chrysler was going, if she liked it and what her typical day was like. She was very excited to meet with me and help me out with the interview. She is 23 years old and graduated here at Michigan State majoring in marketing. She was one of the reasons I got into marketing myself. She and I did a business club in high school that led us down this path and showed us interesting sides to the marketing and advertising world. She Works for Chrysler on a Social Media Marketing team and loves it. She works on different projects all the time two of which she shared with me. Her first job she explained was very interesting. “First I put together a Competitive Analysis of in-market competitors of Chrysler to determine what social media campaigns people were responding to the most. I recorded metrics of how many people were liking certain posts on different brands Facebook - such as Nissan, Honda, Chevy, Ford, etc. using a tool called Expion which was able to record all of the social media activity of each car brand.  I compared that to the results of the campaigns Chrysler was doing and how they were either more or less successful.” Her second job as just as impressive especially when she explains how much money she helped save Chrysler. “I also put together a business case analysis of whether the Chrysler digital team should continue using 2 different digital ad agencies - Pointroll and DoubleClick for their Tier 1 and Tier 2 digital metric reporting or if it would make more sense to go to one and if so which one would be best. I looked at business practices, cost, and how the digital metrics were reported through each agency to decide what would make the most sense in the long run. I came to the conclusion that if Chrysler did both of their Tier 1 and Tier 2 digital metricating through one agency - specifically DoubleClick - would save them over a million dollars per year.” This is so impressive to me. She is very into the research side of marketing and is very talented at it. 
	John Woodcock was one of the most influential people while choosing a business degree for me. He was the teacher at my high school that led the marketing class and the DECA business club. He was the guy that pushed me to try the business club in the first place. I was only a junior at the time but I gave it a chance. I did it two years and the second year I made it to nationals in Salt Lake City, Utah competing in a team marketing skills challenge. He was our coach and mentor through the process and helped us succeed. I wouldn’t be here doing what I’m doing without DECA and what it has to offer. So I caught up with him and asked her what he liked most about teaching it and he explained, “Each year I see what DECA does for the students and it makes it all worth it. It offers so much help to the students to see what real life problems are in different careers. Also the professionalism skills they pick up from the conferences and competitions are impeccable”. He was a great mentor to a lot of students offering one of the most popular classes Marketing Management. I asked him about what he wants to do in the future. And he said that he left the school to pursue his product that he has been marketing himself, a tutoring package for each grade, and that it got really popular. He is doing so good that he doesn’t need to work here and needs to expand his company. But he still helps out at the school encouraging DECA and helping out with the school and enjoys every second of it. 
	The marketing and advertising world is perfect for anyone who enjoys math, statistics, being creative, popular culture, teamwork, leadership, professionalism and so much more. It blends so many interesting aspects into what the world around us is. There is no escaping advertisements in the world we live in today. It is now a part of our daily lives and whether we like it or not it’s here to stay. The idea and basis of advertising can be useful to anyone. The industry itself is a useful one and very lucrative, because no matter what business you are, you have to market yourself to the consumers or you will not profit. Marketing and advertising is the basis of the world’s economy. When people are paying millions of dollars for only a few seconds to advertise your product during big events like the super bowl, you know it’s something to respect.
Works Cited
"About OAAA." About OAAA. N.p., n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
"Cardinals Business." Cardinals Business RSS. N.p., n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
"Choose Your TV Provider Below:." Www.amctv.com. N.p., n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
"Marketing." Merriam-Webster. Merriam-Webster, n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
"Master of Business Administration in Marketing." Department of Marketing. N.p., n.d. Web. 07                                                             Nov. 2013.
McGuinness, William. "Class Of 2013's Starting Salary Tracking Higher On Average Than Last Year's Grads'" The Huffington Post. TheHuffingtonPost.com, 30 Apr. 2013. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
Proquest.com. N.p., n.d. Web. 7 Nov. 2013.
Proquest.com. N.p., n.d. Web. 7 Nov. 2013.
"Top Advertising & Marketing Companies on the 2013 Inc. 5000." Top Advertising & Marketing Companies on the Inc. 5000. N.p., n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2013.
</p>
		</main>
		<footer>
			<p>&copy; 2013 [Ian Schlitt]</p>
		</footer>